# MachineLearningPractice
Random Forest Tutorial for machine learning class assignment.  This directory contains a tutorial of the randomForest package in R, a poster presentation of random forest applications, and a list of sources.

Author: Louie Alexander

Title: Random Forest Identifies Important Variables for Predicting Disease

Keywords: Random Forest, Machine Learning, Disease Prediction, Biomarkers, Cystic Fibrosis

Abstract:
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a disease characterized by poor lung function due to mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR.)  There are over 2000 identified mutations categorized in up to five classes; the most common mutation is a deletion of the phenylalanine codon at position 508 (F508del).  Symptoms of this disease range from shortness of breath, fatigue, chronic bacterial infection, and mucus buildup, and cystic fibrosis can contribute to other illnesses such as liver complications and CF-related diabetes mellitus.   While a majority of CF research focuses on  individuals who are homozygous or heterozygous for the F508del mutation, individuals with the same CFTR genotype have differing symptoms and severity, suggesting other factors affect the CF phenotype.  Notably, the transcription factors ETS-homologous factor (EHF) and ELF5 E74-like ETS transcription factor 5 have been identified as regulators of CFTR, and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near these genes are associated with differences in CF severity.  Polymorphisms like these are identified in genome-wide studies, then their functional effects must be validated in-vitro; however,  in-vitro validation of one SNP is time-intensive, and genome-wide studies may identify several SNPs of interest that each require a lot of time and resources to validate.  Random forest can direct this in-vitro research by using variable-importance metrics to identify which SNPs contribute strongly to distinguishing between phenotypes of cystic fibrosis severity.  Random forest is a statistical method of generating many decision trees using random subsets of variables in a dataset, then creating a composite model representing the consensus of these trees.  Variable importance metrics quantify the accuracy lost in these decision trees when a variable is not included, and the accuracy gained when a variable is included.  Therefore, random forest can quantify the relative contribution of each variable to the classification model, while also generating a classification model.  Using this methodology, SNPs with a putative effect on cystic fibrosis phenotypes can be identified, in-silico random forest classification can determine which SNPs are most relevant to classifying the phenotypes of interest, then in-vitro validation can be performed to determine the mechanism by which a SNP affects the phenotype.  Additionally, a random forest model trained in this way could predict the severity of a patient given their SNP genotype.
